Cancer immunotherapy

The artificial stimulation of the immune system to treat cancer, improving on
the system's natural ability to fight cancer

Cancer immunotherapy (sometimes called immuno-oncology) is the artificial
stimulation of the immune system to treat cancer, improving on the system's
natural ability to fight cancer. It is an application of the fundamental
research of cancer immunology and a growing subspecialty of oncology. It
exploits the fact that cancer cells often have tumor antigens, molecules on
their surface that can be detected by the antibody proteins of the immune
system, binding to them. The tumor antigens are often proteins or other
macromolecules (e.g. carbohydrates). Normal antibodies bind to external
pathogens, but the modified immunotherapy antibodies bind to the tumor
antigens marking and identifying the cancer cells for the immune system to
inhibit or kill.

Immunotherapy categories

Immunotherapies can be categorized as active, passive or hybrid (active and
passive). Active immunotherapy directs the immune system to attack tumor cells
by targeting tumor antigens. Passive immunotherapies enhance existing anti-
tumor responses and include the use of monoclonal antibodies, lymphocytes and
cytokines.

A wide range of cancers can be treated by various immunotherapy medicines that
have been approved in many jurisdictions around the world.

Passive antibody therapies commonly involve the targeting of Cell surface
receptors and include CD20, CD274 and CD279 antibodies. Once bound to a cancer
antigen, the modified antibodies can induce antibody-dependent cell-mediated
cytotoxicity, activate the complement system, or prevent a receptor from
interacting with its ligand, all of which can lead to cell death.

Approved immunotherapy antibodies include alemtuzumab, ipilimumab, nivolumab,
ofatumumab and rituximab.

Active cellular therapies usually involve the removal of immune cells from the
blood or from a tumor. Those specific for the tumor are grown in culture and
returned to the patient where they attack the tumor; alternatively, immune
cells can be genetically engineered to express a tumor-specific receptor,
cultured and returned to the patient. Cell types that can be used in this way
are natural killer (NK) cells, lymphokine-activated killer cells, cytotoxic T
cells and dendritic cells.

Cellular immunotherapy

Dendritic cell therapy

Blood cells are removed from the body, incubated with tumour antigen(s) and
activated. Mature dendritic cells are then returned to the original cancer-
bearing donor to induce an immune response.

Dendritic cell therapy provokes anti-tumor responses by causing dendritic
cells to present tumor antigens to lymphocytes, which activates them, priming
them to kill other cells that present the antigen. Dendritic cells are antigen
presenting cells (APCs) in the mammalian immune system. In cancer treatment
they aid cancer antigen targeting. The only approved cellular cancer
therapy based on dendritic cells is sipuleucel-T.

One method of inducing dendritic cells to present tumor antigens is by
vaccination with autologous tumor lysates or short peptides (small parts of
protein that correspond to the protein antigens on cancer cells). These
peptides are often given in combination with adjuvants (highly immunogenic
substances) to increase the immune and anti-tumor responses. Other adjuvants
include proteins or other chemicals that attract and/or activate dendritic
cells, such as granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). The
most common source of antigens used for dendritic cell vaccine in Glioblastoma
(GBM) as an aggressive brain tumor were whole tumor lysate, CMV antigen RNA
and tumor associated peptides like EGFRvIII.

Dendritic cells can also be activated in vivo by making tumor cells express
GM-CSF. This can be achieved by either genetically engineering tumor cells to
produce GM-CSF or by infecting tumor cells with an oncolytic virus that
expresses GM-CSF.

Another strategy is to remove dendritic cells from the blood of a patient and
activate them outside the body. The dendritic cells are activated in the
presence of tumor antigens, which may be a single tumor-specific
peptide/protein or a tumor cell lysate (a solution of broken down tumor
cells). These cells (with optional adjuvants) are infused and provoke an
immune response.

Dendritic cell therapies include the use of antibodies that bind to receptors
on the surface of dendritic cells. Antigens can be added to the antibody and
can induce the dendritic cells to mature and provide immunity to the tumor.
Dendritic cell receptors such as TLR3, TLR7, TLR8 or CD40 have been used as
antibody targets. Dendritic cell-NK cell interface also has an important
role in immunotherapy. The design of new dendritic cell-based vaccination
strategies should also encompass NK cell-stimulating potency. It is critical
to systematically incorporate NK cells monitoring as an outcome in antitumor
DC-based clinical trials.

Approved drugs

Sipuleucel-T (Provenge) was approved for treatment of asymptomatic or
minimally symptomatic metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer in 2010.
The treatment consists of removal of antigen presenting cells from blood by
leukapheresis and growing them with the fusion protein PA2024 made from GM-CSF
and prostate-specific prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP) and reinfused. This
process is repeated three times.

CAR-T cell therapy

The premise of CAR-T immunotherapy is to modify T cells to recognize cancer
cells in order to more effectively target and destroy them. Scientists harvest
T cells from people, genetically alter them to add a chimeric antigen receptor
(CAR) that specifically recognizes cancer cells, then infuse the resulting
CAR-T cells into patients to attack their tumors.

Approved drugs

Tisagenlecleucel (Kymriah), a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR-T) therapy, was
approved by FDA in 2017 to treat acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). This
treatment removes CD19 positive cells (B-cells) from the body (including the
diseased cells, but also normal antibody producing cells).

Axicabtagene ciloleucel (Yescarta) is another CAR-T therapeutic, approved in
2017 for treatment of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL).

Antibody therapy

Many forms of antibodies can be engineered.

Antibodies are a key component of the adaptive immune response, playing a
central role in both recognizing foreign antigens and stimulating an immune
response. Antibodies are Y-shaped proteins produced by some B cells and are
composed of two regions: an antigen-binding fragment (Fab), which binds to
antigens, and a Fragment crystallizable (Fc) region, which interacts with so-
called Fc receptors that are expressed on the surface of different immune cell
types including macrophages, neutrophils and NK cells. Many immunotherapeutic
regimens involve antibodies. Monoclonal antibody technology engineers and
generates antibodies against specific antigens, such as those present on tumor
surfaces. These antibodies that are specific to the antigens of the tumor, can
then be injected into a tumor

Antibody types

Conjugation

Two types are used in cancer treatments:

Naked monoclonal antibodies are antibodies without added elements. Most antibody therapies use this antibody type.
Conjugated monoclonal antibodies are joined to another molecule, which is either cytotoxic or radioactive. The toxic chemicals are those typically used as chemotherapy drugs, but other toxins can be used. The antibody binds to specific antigens on cancer cell surfaces, directing the therapy to the tumor. Radioactive compound-linked antibodies are referred to as radiolabelled. Chemolabelled or immunotoxins antibodies are tagged with chemotherapeutic molecules or toxins, respectively.

Fc regions

Fc's ability to bind Fc receptors is important because it allows antibodies to
activate the immune system. Fc regions are varied: they exist in numerous
subtypes and can be further modified, for example with the addition of sugars
in a process called glycosylation. Changes in the Fc region can alter an
antibody's ability to engage Fc receptors and, by extension, will determine
the type of immune response that the antibody triggers. Many cancer
immunotherapy drugs, including PD-1 and PD-L1 inhibitors, are antibodies. For
example, immune checkpoint blockers targeting PD-1 are antibodies designed to
bind PD-1 expressed by T cells and reactivate these cells to eliminate
tumors. Anti-PD-1 drugs contain not only an Fab region that binds PD-1 but
also an Fc region. Experimental work indicates that the Fc portion of cancer
immunotherapy drugs can affect the outcome of treatment. For example, anti-
PD-1 drugs with Fc regions that bind inhibitory Fc receptors can have
decreased therapeutic efficacy. Imaging studies have further shown that
the Fc region of anti-PD-1 drugs can bind Fc receptors expressed by tumor-
associated macrophages. This process removes the drugs from their intended
targets (i.e. PD-1 molecules expressed on the surface of T cells) and limits
therapeutic efficacy. Furthermore, antibodies targeting the co-stimulatory
protein CD40 require engagement with selective Fc receptors for optimal
therapeutic efficacy. Together, these studies underscore the importance of
Fc status in antibody-based immune checkpoint targeting strategies.

Human/non-human balance

Antibodies are also referred to as murine, chimeric, humanized and human.
Murine antibodies are from a different species and carry a risk of immune
reaction. Chimeric antibodies attempt to reduce murine antibodies'
immunogenicity by replacing part of the antibody with the corresponding human
counterpart, known as the constant region. Humanized antibodies are almost
completely human; only the complementarity determining regions of the variable
regions are derived from murine sources. Human antibodies have been produced
using unmodified human DNA.

Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity. When the Fc receptors on
natural killer (NK) cells interact with Fc regions of antibodies bound to
cancer cells, the NK cell releases perforin and granzyme, leading to cancer
cell apoptosis.

Cell death mechanisms

Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC)

Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) requires antibodies to
bind to target cell surfaces. Antibodies are formed of a binding region (Fab)
and the Fc region that can be detected by immune system cells via their Fc
surface receptors. Fc receptors are found on many immune system cells,
including NK cells. When NK cells encounter antibody-coated cells, the
latter's Fc regions interact with their Fc receptors, releasing perforin and
granzyme B to kill the tumor cell. Examples include Rituximab, Ofatumumab and
Alemtuzumab. Antibodies under development have altered Fc regions that have
higher affinity for a specific type of Fc receptor, FcγRIIIA, which can
dramatically increase effectiveness.

Complement

The complement system includes blood proteins that can cause cell death after
an antibody binds to the cell surface (the classical complement pathway, among
the ways of complement activation). Generally the system deals with foreign
pathogens, but can be activated with therapeutic antibodies in cancer. The
system can be triggered if the antibody is chimeric, humanized or human; as
long as it contains the IgG1 Fc region. Complement can lead to cell death by
activation of the membrane attack complex, known as complement-dependent
cytotoxicity; enhancement of antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity;
and CR3-dependent cellular cytotoxicity. Complement-dependent cytotoxicity
occurs when antibodies bind to the cancer cell surface, the C1 complex binds
to these antibodies and subsequently protein pores are formed in the cancer
cell membrane.

FDA-approved antibodies

Alemtuzumab

Alemtuzumab (Campath-1H) is an anti-CD52 humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody
indicated for the treatment of fludarabine-refractory chronic lymphocytic
leukemia (CLL), cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, peripheral T-cell lymphoma and
T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia. CD52 is found on >95% of peripheral blood
lymphocytes (both T-cells and B-cells) and monocytes, but its function in
lymphocytes is unknown. It binds to CD52 and initiates its cytotoxic effect by
complement fixation and ADCC mechanisms. Due to the antibody target (cells of
the immune system) common complications of alemtuzumab therapy are infection,
toxicity and myelosuppression.

Atezolizumab

Durvalumab (Imfinzi) is a human immunoglobulin G1 kappa (IgG1κ) monoclonal
antibody that blocks the interaction of programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1)
with the PD-1 and CD80 (B7.1) molecules. Durvalumab is approved for the
treatment of patients with locally advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma
who:

have disease progression during or following platinum-containing chemotherapy.
have disease progression within 12 months of neoadjuvant or adjuvant treatment with platinum-containing chemotherapy.

Ipilimumab

Ipilimumab (Yervoy) is a human IgG1 antibody that binds the surface protein
CTLA4. In normal physiology T-cells are activated by two signals: the T-cell
receptor binding to an antigen-MHC complex and T-cell surface receptor CD28
binding to CD80 or CD86 proteins. CTLA4 binds to CD80 or CD86, preventing the
binding of CD28 to these surface proteins and therefore negatively regulates
the activation of T-cells.

Active cytotoxic T-cells are required for the immune system to attack melanoma
cells. Normally inhibited active melanoma-specific cytotoxic T-cells can
produce an effective anti-tumor response. Ipilumumab can cause a shift in the
ratio of regulatory T-cells to cytotoxic T-cells to increase the anti-tumor
response. Regulatory T-cells inhibit other T-cells, which may benefit the
tumor.

Nivolumab

Ofatumumab

Ofatumumab is a second generation human IgG1 antibody that binds to CD20. It
is used in the treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) because the
cancerous cells of CLL are usually CD20-expressing B-cells. Unlike rituximab,
which binds to a large loop of the CD20 protein, ofatumumab binds to a
separate, small loop. This may explain their different characteristics.
Compared to rituximab, ofatumumab induces complement-dependent cytotoxicity at
a lower dose with less immunogenicity.

Pembrolizumab

As of 2017, pembrolizumab, which blocks PD-1, programmed cell death protein 1,
has been used via intravenous infusion to treat inoperable or metastatic
melanoma, metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in certain situations,
as a second-line treatment for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC),
after platinum-based chemotherapy, and for the treatment of adult and
pediatric patients with refractory classic Hodgkin's lymphoma (cHL).

Rituximab

Rituximab is a chimeric monoclonal IgG1 antibody specific for CD20, developed
from its parent antibody Ibritumomab. As with ibritumomab, rituximab targets
CD20, making it effective in treating certain B-cell malignancies. These
include aggressive and indolent lymphomas such as diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma and follicular lymphoma and leukemias such as B-cell chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Although the function of CD20 is relatively unknown,
CD20 may be a calcium channel involved in B-cell activation. The antibody's
mode of action is primarily through the induction of ADCC and complement-
mediated cytotoxicity. Other mechanisms include apoptosis[clarification
needed] and cellular growth arrest. Rituximab also increases the sensitivity
of cancerous B-cells to chemotherapy.

Cytokine therapy

Cytokines are proteins produced by many types of cells present within a tumor.
They can modulate immune responses. The tumor often employs them to allow it
to grow and reduce the immune response. These immune-modulating effects allow
them to be used as drugs to provoke an immune response. Two commonly used
cytokines are interferons and interleukins.

Interleukin-2 and interferon-α are cytokines, proteins that regulate and
coordinate the behavior of the immune system. They have the ability to enhance
anti-tumor activity and thus can be used as passive cancer treatments.
Interferon-α is used in the treatment of hairy-cell leukaemia, AIDS-related
Kaposi's sarcoma, follicular lymphoma, chronic myeloid leukaemia and malignant
melanoma. Interleukin-2 is used in the treatment of malignant melanoma and
renal cell carcinoma.

Interferon

Interferons are produced by the immune system. They are usually involved in
anti-viral response, but also have use for cancer. They fall in three groups:
type I (IFNα and IFNβ), type II (IFNγ) and type III (IFNλ). IFNα has been
approved for use in hairy-cell leukaemia, AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma,
follicular lymphoma, chronic myeloid leukaemia and melanoma. Type I and II
IFNs have been researched extensively and although both types promote anti-
tumor immune system effects, only type I IFNs have been shown to be clinically
effective. IFNλ shows promise for its anti-tumor effects in animal
models.

Unlike type I IFNs, Interferon gamma is not approved yet for the treatment of
any cancer.However, improved survival was observed when Interferon gamma was
administrated to patients with bladder carcinoma and melanoma cancers. The
most promising result was achieved in patients with stage 2 and 3 of ovarian
carcinoma.The in vitro study of IFN-gamma in cancer cells is more extensive
and results indicate anti-proliferative activity of IFN-gamma leading to the
growth inhibition or cell death, generally induced by apoptosis but sometimes
by autophagy.

Interleukin

Interleukins have an array of immune system effects. Interleukin-2 is used in
the treatment of malignant melanoma and renal cell carcinoma. In normal
physiology it promotes both effector T cells and T-regulatory cells, but its
exact mechanism of action is unknown.

Combination immunotherapy

Combining various immunotherapies such as PD1 and CTLA4 inhibitors can enhance
anti-tumor response leading to durable responses.

Combining ablation therapy of tumors with immunotherapy enhances the
immunostimulating response and has synergistic effects for curative metastatic
cancer treatment.

Combining checkpoint immunotherapies with pharmaceutical agents has the
potential to improve response, and such combination therapies are a highly
investigated area of clinical investigation. Immunostimulatory drugs such
as CSF-1R inhibitors and TLR agonists have been particularly effective in this
setting.

Polysaccharide-K

Japan's Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare approved the use of
polysaccharide-K extracted from the mushroom, Coriolus versicolor, in the
1980s, to stimulate the immune systems of patients undergoing chemotherapy. It
is a dietary supplement in the US and other jurisdictions.

Genetic pre-testing for therapeutic significance

Because of the high cost of many of the immunotherapy medications and the
reluctance of medical insurance companies to prepay for their prescriptions
various test methods have been proposed, to attempt to forecast the
effectiveness of these medications. The detection of PD-L1 protein seemed to
be an indication of cancer susceptible to several immunotherapy medications,
but research found that both the lack of this protein or its inclusion in the
cancerous tissue was inconclusive, due to the little-understood varying
quantities of the protein during different times and locations within the
infected cells and tissue.

In 2018 some genetic indications such as Tumor Mutational Burden (TMB, the
number of mutations within a targeted genetic region in the cancerous cell's
DNA), and Microsatellite instability (MSI, the quantity of impaired DNA
mismatch leading to probable mutations), have been approved by the FDA as good
indicators for the probability of effective treatment of immunotherapy
medication for certain cancers, but research is still in progress.

In some cases the FDA has approved genetic tests for medication that is
specific to certain genetic markers. For example, the FDA approved BRAF
associated medication for metastatic melanoma, to be administered to patients
after testing for the BRAF genetic mutation.

Tests of this sort are being widely advertised for general cancer treatment
and are expensive. In the past, some genetic testing for cancer treatment has
been involved in scams such as the Duke University Cancer Fraud scandal, or
claimed to be hoaxes.

Research

Adoptive T-cell therapy

Cancer specific T-cells can be obtained by fragmentation and isolation of
tumour infiltrating lymphocytes, or by genetically engineering cells from
peripheral blood. The cells are activated and grown prior to transfusion into
the recipient (tumor bearer).

Adoptive T cell therapy is a form of passive immunization by the transfusion
of T-cells (adoptive cell transfer). They are found in blood and tissue and
usually activate when they find foreign pathogens. Specifically they activate
when the T-cell's surface receptors encounter cells that display parts of
foreign proteins on their surface antigens. These can be either infected
cells, or antigen presenting cells (APCs). They are found in normal tissue and
in tumor tissue, where they are known as tumor infiltrating lymphocytes
(TILs). They are activated by the presence of APCs such as dendritic cells
that present tumor antigens. Although these cells can attack the tumor, the
environment within the tumor is highly immunosuppressive, preventing immune-
mediated tumour death.

Multiple ways of producing and obtaining tumour targeted T-cells have been
developed. T-cells specific to a tumor antigen can be removed from a tumor
sample (TILs) or filtered from blood. Subsequent activation and culturing is
performed ex vivo, with the results reinfused. Activation can take place
through gene therapy, or by exposing the T cells to tumor antigens.

As of 2014, multiple ACT clinical trials were underway.
Importantly, one study from 2018 showed that clinical responses can be
obtained in patients with metastatic melanoma resistant to multiple previous
immunotherapies.

The first 2 adoptive T-cell therapies, tisagenlecleucel and axicabtagene
ciloleucel, were approved by the FDA in 2017.

Another approach is adoptive transfer of haploidentical γδ T cells or NK cells
from a healthy donor. The major advantage of this approach is that these cells
do not cause GVHD. The disadvantage is frequently impaired function of the
transferred cells.

Anti-CD47 therapy

Many tumor cells overexpress CD47 to escape immunosurveilance of host immune
system. CD47 binds to its receptor signal regulatory protein alpha (SIRPα) and
downregulate phagocytosis of tumor cell. Therefore, anti-CD47 therapy aims
to restore clearance of tumor cells. Additionally, growing evidence supports
the employment of tumor antigen-specific T cell response in response to anti-
CD47 therapy. A number of therapeutics is being developed, including
anti-CD47 antibodies, engineered decoy receptors, anti-SIRPα antibodies and
bispecific agents. As of 2017, wide range of solid and hematologic
malignancies were being clinically tested.

Anti-GD2 antibodies

Carbohydrate antigens on the surface of cells can be used as targets for
immunotherapy. GD2 is a ganglioside found on the surface of many types of
cancer cell including neuroblastoma, retinoblastoma, melanoma, small cell lung
cancer, brain tumors, osteosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, Ewing's sarcoma,
liposarcoma, fibrosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma and other soft tissue sarcomas. It
is not usually expressed on the surface of normal tissues, making it a good
target for immunotherapy. As of 2014, clinical trials were underway.

 Immune checkpoints

Cancer therapy by inhibition of negative immune regulation (CTLA4, PD1)

Immune checkpoints affect immune system function. Immune checkpoints can be
stimulatory or inhibitory. Tumors can use these checkpoints to protect
themselves from immune system attacks. Currently approved checkpoint therapies
block inhibitory checkpoint receptors. Blockade of negative feedback signaling
to immune cells thus results in an enhanced immune response against
tumors.

One ligand-receptor interaction under investigation is the interaction between
the transmembrane programmed cell death 1 protein (PDCD1, PD-1; also known as
CD279) and its ligand, PD-1 ligand 1 (PD-L1, CD274). PD-L1 on the cell surface
binds to PD1 on an immune cell surface, which inhibits immune cell activity.
Among PD-L1 functions is a key regulatory role on T cell activities. It
appears that (cancer-mediated) upregulation of PD-L1 on the cell surface may
inhibit T cells that might otherwise attack. PD-L1 on cancer cells also
inhibits FAS- and interferon-dependent apoptosis, protecting cells from
cytotoxic molecules produced by T cells. Antibodies that bind to either PD-1
or PD-L1 and therefore block the interaction may allow the T-cells to attack
the tumor.

CTLA-4 blockade

The first checkpoint antibody approved by the FDA was ipilimumab, approved in
2011 for treatment of melanoma. It blocks the immune checkpoint molecule
CTLA-4. Clinical trials have also shown some benefits of anti-CTLA-4 therapy
on lung cancer or pancreatic cancer, specifically in combination with other
drugs. In on-going trials the combination of CTLA-4 blockade with PD-1
or PD-L1 inhibitors is tested on different types of cancer.

However, patients treated with check-point blockade (specifically CTLA-4
blocking antibodies), or a combination of check-point blocking antibodies, are
at high risk of suffering from immune-related adverse events such as
dermatologic, gastrointestinal, endocrine, or hepatic autoimmune
reactions. These are most likely due to the breadth of the induced T-cell
activation when anti-CTLA-4 antibodies are administered by injection in the
blood stream.

Using a mouse model of bladder cancer, researchers have found that a local
injection of a low dose anti-CTLA-4 in the tumour area had the same tumour
inhibiting capacity as when the antibody was delivered in the blood. At
the same time the levels of circulating antibodies were lower, suggesting that
local administration of the anti-CTLA-4 therapy might result in fewer adverse
events.

PD-1 inhibitors

Initial clinical trial results with IgG4 PD1 antibody Nivolumab were published
in 2010. It was approved in 2014. Nivolumab is approved to treat melanoma,
lung cancer, kidney cancer, bladder cancer, head and neck cancer, and
Hodgkin's lymphoma. A 2016 clinical trial for non-small cell lung cancer
failed to meet its primary endpoint for treatment in the first line setting,
but is FDA approved in subsequent lines of therapy.

Pembrolizumab is another PD1 inhibitor that was approved by the FDA in 2014.
Keytruda (Pembrolizumab) is approved to treat melanoma and lung cancer.

Antibody BGB-A317 is a PD-1 inhibitor (designed to not bind Fc gamma receptor
I) in early clinical trials.

PD-L1 inhibitors

In May 2016, PD-L1 inhibitor atezolizumab was approved for treating
bladder cancer.

Anti-PD-L1 antibodies currently in development include avelumab and
durvalumab, in addition to an affimer biotherapeutic.

Other modes of enhancing  immuno-therapy include targeting so-called
intrinsic checkpoint blockades e.g. CISH. A number of cancer patients do not
respond to immune checkpoint blockade. Response rate may be improved by
combining immune checkpoint blockade with additional rationally selected
anticancer therapies (out of which some may stimulate T cell infiltration into
tumors). For example, targeted therapies such, radiotherapy, vasculature
targeting agents, and immunogenic chemotherapy can improve immune
checkpoint blockade response in animal models of cancer.

Oncolytic virus

An oncolytic virus is a virus that preferentially infects and kills cancer
cells. As the infected cancer cells are destroyed by oncolysis, they release
new infectious virus particles or virions to help destroy the remaining
tumour. Oncolytic viruses are thought not only to cause direct destruction of
the tumour cells, but also to stimulate host anti-tumour immune responses for
long-term immunotherapy.

The potential of viruses as anti-cancer agents was first realized in the early
twentieth century, although coordinated research efforts did not begin until
the 1960s. A number of viruses including adenovirus, reovirus, measles, herpes
simplex, Newcastle disease virus and vaccinia have now been clinically tested
as oncolytic agents. T-Vec is the first FDA-approved oncolytic virus for the
treatment of melanoma. A number of other oncolytic viruses are in Phase II-III
development.

Polysaccharides

Certain compounds found in mushrooms, primarily polysaccharides, can up-
regulate the immune system and may have anti-cancer properties. For example,
beta-glucans such as lentinan have been shown in laboratory studies to
stimulate macrophage, NK cells, T cells and immune system cytokines and have
been investigated in clinical trials as immunologic adjuvants.

Neoantigens

Many tumors express mutations. These mutations potentially create new
targetable antigens (neoantigens) for use in T cell immunotherapy. The
presence of CD8+ T cells in cancer lesions, as identified using RNA sequencing
data, is higher in tumors with a high mutational burden. The level of
transcripts associated with cytolytic activity of natural killer cells and T
cells positively correlates with mutational load in many human tumors. In
non–small cell lung cancer patients treated with lambrolizumab, mutational
load shows a strong correlation with clinical response. In melanoma patients
treated with ipilimumab, long-term benefit is also associated with a higher
mutational load, although less significantly. The predicted MHC binding
neoantigens in patients with a long-term clinical benefit were enriched for a
series of tetrapeptide motifs that were not found in tumors of patients with
no or minimal clinical benefit. However, human neoantigens identified in
other studies do not show the bias toward tetrapeptide signatures.

See also

References

  1. ^ Korneev KV, Atretkhany KN, Drutskaya MS, Grivennikov SI, Kuprash DV, Nedospasov SA (January 2017). "TLR-signaling and proinflammatory cytokines as drivers of tumorigenesis". Cytokine. 89: 127–35. doi:10.1016/j.cyto.2016.01.021. PMID 26854213.
  2. ^ Riddell SR (July 2001). "Progress in cancer vaccines by enhanced self-presentation". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 98 (16): 8933–35. Bibcode:2001PNAS...98.8933R. doi:10.1073/pnas.171326398. PMC 55350. PMID 11481463.
  3. ^ a b Palucka K, Banchereau J (July 2013). "Dendritic-cell-based therapeutic cancer vaccines". Immunity. 39 (1): 38–48. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2013.07.004. PMC 3788678. PMID 23890062.
  4. ^ Hirayama M, Nishimura Y (July 2016). "The present status and future prospects of peptide-based cancer vaccines". International Immunology. 28 (7): 319–28. doi:10.1093/intimm/dxw027. PMID 27235694.
  5. ^ Dastmalchi, Farhad; Karachi, Aida; Mitchell, Duane; Rahman, Maryam (2018), "Dendritic Cell Therapy", eLS, American Cancer Society, pp. 1–27, doi:10.1002/9780470015902.a0024243, ISBN 9780470015902, retrieved 2019-01-08
  6. ^ Calmeiro J, Carrascal M, Gomes C, Falcão A, Cruz MT, Neves BM (November 2018). "Highlighting the Role of DC-NK Cell Interplay in Immunobiology and Immunotherapy". Dendritic Cells, Intech. doi:10.5772/intechopen.78804.
  7. ^ Gardner TA, Elzey BD, Hahn NM (April 2012). "Sipuleucel-T (Provenge) autologous vaccine approved for treatment of men with asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic castrate-resistant metastatic prostate cancer". Human Vaccines & Immunotherapeutics. 8 (4): 534–39. doi:10.4161/hv.19795. PMID 22832254.
  8. ^ Oudard S (May 2013). "Progress in emerging therapies for advanced prostate cancer". Cancer Treatment Reviews. 39 (3): 275–89. doi:10.1016/j.ctrv.2012.09.005. PMID 23107383.
  9. ^ Sims RB (June 2012). "Development of sipuleucel-T: autologous cellular immunotherapy for the treatment of metastatic castrate resistant prostate cancer". Vaccine. 30 (29): 4394–97. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.11.058. PMID 22122856.
  10. ^ Shore ND, Mantz CA, Dosoretz DE, Fernandez E, Myslicki FA, McCoy C, Finkelstein SE, Fishman MN (January 2013). "Building on sipuleucel-T for immunologic treatment of castration-resistant prostate cancer". Cancer Control. 20 (1): 7–16. doi:10.1177/107327481302000103. PMID 23302902.
  11. ^ Commissioner, Office of the. "Press Announcements – FDA approval brings first gene therapy to the United States". fda.gov. Retrieved 13 December 2017.
  12. ^ a b "FDA approves CAR-T cell therapy to treat adults with certain types of large B-cell lymphoma". fda.gov. 18 October 2017. Retrieved 8 November 2017.
  13. ^ a b Scott AM, Wolchok JD, Old LJ (March 2012). "Antibody therapy of cancer". Nature Reviews. Cancer. 12 (4): 278–87. doi:10.1038/nrc3236. PMID 22437872.
  14. ^ a b Harding FA, Stickler MM, Razo J, DuBridge RB (May–Jun 2010). "The immunogenicity of humanized and fully human antibodies: residual immunogenicity resides in the CDR regions". MAbs. 2 (3): 256–65. doi:10.4161/mabs.2.3.11641. PMC 2881252. PMID 20400861.
  15. ^ Pincetic A, Bournazos S, DiLillo DJ, Maamary J, Wang TT, Dahan R, Fiebiger BM, Ravetch JV (August 2014). "Type I and type II Fc receptors regulate innate and adaptive immunity". Nature Immunology. 15 (8): 707–16. doi:10.1038/ni.2939. PMID 25045879.
  16. ^ Topalian SL, Hodi FS, Brahmer JR, Gettinger SN, Smith DC, McDermott DF, Powderly JD, Carvajal RD, Sosman JA, Atkins MB, Leming PD, Spigel DR, Antonia SJ, Horn L, Drake CG, Pardoll DM, Chen L, Sharfman WH, Anders RA, Taube JM, McMiller TL, Xu H, Korman AJ, Jure-Kunkel M, Agrawal S, McDonald D, Kollia GD, Gupta A, Wigginton JM, Sznol M (June 2012). "Safety, activity, and immune correlates of anti-PD-1 antibody in cancer". The New England Journal of Medicine. 366 (26): 2443–54. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1200690. PMC 3544539. PMID 22658127.
  17. ^ Dahan R, Sega E, Engelhardt J, Selby M, Korman AJ, Ravetch JV (October 2015). "FcγRs Modulate the Anti-tumor Activity of Antibodies Targeting the PD-1/PD-L1 Axis". Cancer Cell. 28 (4): 543. doi:10.1016/j.ccell.2015.09.011. PMID 28854351.
  18. ^ Arlauckas SP, Garris CS, Kohler RH, Kitaoka M, Cuccarese MF, Yang KS, Miller MA, Carlson JC, Freeman GJ, Anthony RM, Weissleder R, Pittet MJ (May 2017). "In vivo imaging reveals a tumor-associated macrophage-mediated resistance pathway in anti-PD-1 therapy". Science Translational Medicine. 9 (389): eaal3604. doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aal3604. PMC 5734617. PMID 28490665.
  19. ^ Dahan R, Barnhart BC, Li F, Yamniuk AP, Korman AJ, Ravetch JV (July 2016). "Therapeutic Activity of Agonistic, Human Anti-CD40 Monoclonal Antibodies Requires Selective FcγR Engagement". Cancer Cell. 29 (6): 820–31. doi:10.1016/j.ccell.2016.05.001. PMC 4975533. PMID 27265505.
  20. ^ Weiner LM, Surana R, Wang S (May 2010). "Monoclonal antibodies: versatile platforms for cancer immunotherapy". Nature Reviews. Immunology. 10 (5): 317–27. doi:10.1038/nri2744. PMC 3508064. PMID 20414205.
  21. ^ Seidel UJ, Schlegel P, Lang P (2013). "Natural killer cell mediated antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity in tumor immunotherapy with therapeutic antibodies". Frontiers in Immunology. 4: 76. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2013.00076. PMC 3608903. PMID 23543707.
  22. ^ Gelderman KA, Tomlinson S, Ross GD, Gorter A (March 2004). "Complement function in mAb-mediated cancer immunotherapy". Trends in Immunology. 25 (3): 158–64. doi:10.1016/j.it.2004.01.008. PMID 15036044.
  23. ^ Waldmann TA (March 2003). "Immunotherapy: past, present and future". Nature Medicine. 9 (3): 269–77. doi:10.1038/nm0303-269. PMID 12612576.
  24. ^ Demko S, Summers J, Keegan P, Pazdur R (February 2008). "FDA drug approval summary: alemtuzumab as single-agent treatment for B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia". The Oncologist. 13 (2): 167–74. doi:10.1634/theoncologist.2007-0218. PMID 18305062.
  25. ^ "FDA approves new, targeted treatment for bladder cancer". FDA. 18 May 2016. Retrieved 20 May 2016.
  26. ^ "US Food and Drug Administration – Avelumab Prescribing Label" (PDF).
  27. ^ Pazdur R. "FDA approval for Ipilimumab". Retrieved 7 November 2013.
  28. ^ Lemery SJ, Zhang J, Rothmann MD, Yang J, Earp J, Zhao H, McDougal A, Pilaro A, Chiang R, Gootenberg JE, Keegan P, Pazdur R (September 2010). "U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval: ofatumumab for the treatment of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia refractory to fludarabine and alemtuzumab". Clinical Cancer Research. 16 (17): 4331–38. doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-0570. PMID 20601446.
  29. ^ a b Sharma P, Allison JP (April 2015). "The future of immune checkpoint therapy". Science. 348 (6230): 56–61. Bibcode:2015Sci...348...56S. doi:10.1126/science.aaa8172. PMID 25838373.
  30. ^ "Opdivo Drug Approval History".
  31. ^ James JS, Dubs G (December 1997). "FDA approves new kind of lymphoma treatment. Food and Drug Administration". AIDS Treatment News (284): 2–3. PMID 11364912.
  32. ^ Research, Center for Drug Evaluation and. "Approved Drugs – Durvalumab (Imfinzi)". fda.gov. Retrieved 6 May 2017.
  33. ^ "FDA approves durvalumab after chemoradiation for unresectable stage III NSCLC".
  34. ^ Byrd JC, Stilgenbauer S, Flinn IW. Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia. Hematology (Am Soc Hematol Educ Program) 2004: 163–83. Date. Retrieved 26 January 2006.
  35. ^ Domagała A, Kurpisz M (Mar–Apr 2001). "CD52 antigen – a review". Medical Science Monitor. 7 (2): 325–31. PMID 11257744.
  36. ^ Dearden C (July 2012). "How I treat prolymphocytic leukemia". Blood. 120 (3): 538–51. doi:10.1182/blood-2012-01-380139. PMID 22649104.
  37. ^ a b Sondak VK, Smalley KS, Kudchadkar R, Grippon S, Kirkpatrick P (June 2011). "Ipilimumab". Nature Reviews. Drug Discovery. 10 (6): 411–12. doi:10.1038/nrd3463. PMID 21629286.
  38. ^ a b Lipson EJ, Drake CG (November 2011). "Ipilimumab: an anti-CTLA-4 antibody for metastatic melanoma". Clinical Cancer Research. 17 (22): 6958–62. doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-1595. PMC 3575079. PMID 21900389.
  39. ^ a b Thumar JR, Kluger HM (December 2010). "Ipilimumab: a promising immunotherapy for melanoma". Oncology. 24 (14): 1280–88. PMID 21294471.
  40. ^ a b Chambers CA, Kuhns MS, Egen JG, Allison JP (2001). "CTLA-4-mediated inhibition in regulation of T cell responses: mechanisms and manipulation in tumor immunotherapy". Annual Review of Immunology. 19: 565–94. doi:10.1146/annurev.immunol.19.1.565. PMID 11244047.
  41. ^ Castillo J, Perez K (2010). "The role of ofatumumab in the treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia resistant to previous therapies". Journal of Blood Medicine. 1: 1–8. doi:10.2147/jbm.s7284. PMC 3262337. PMID 22282677.
  42. ^ Zhang B (Jul–Aug 2009). "Ofatumumab". MAbs. 1 (4): 326–31. doi:10.4161/mabs.1.4.8895. PMC 2726602. PMID 20068404.
  43. ^ "Pembrolizumab label" (PDF). FDA. May 2017. linked from Index page at FDA website November 2016
  44. ^ "Pembrolizumab label at eMC". UK Electronic Medicines Compendium. 27 January 2017.
  45. ^ Keating GM (July 2010). "Rituximab: a review of its use in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, low-grade or follicular lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma". Drugs. 70 (11): 1445–76. doi:10.2165/11201110-000000000-00000. PMID 20614951.
  46. ^ a b Plosker GL, Figgitt DP (2003). "Rituximab: a review of its use in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukaemia". Drugs. 63 (8): 803–43. doi:10.2165/00003495-200363080-00005. PMID 12662126.
  47. ^ Cerny T, Borisch B, Introna M, Johnson P, Rose AL (November 2002). "Mechanism of action of rituximab". Anti-Cancer Drugs. 13 Suppl 2: S3–10. doi:10.1097/00001813-200211002-00002. PMID 12710585.
  48. ^ Janeway C, Travers P, Walport M, Shlomchik M (2001). Immunobiology (Fifth ed.). New York and London: Garland Science. ISBN 978-0-8153-4101-7.
  49. ^ Weiner GJ (April 2010). "Rituximab: mechanism of action". Seminars in Hematology. 47 (2): 115–23. doi:10.1053/j.seminhematol.2010.01.011. PMC 2848172. PMID 20350658.
  50. ^ a b Dranoff G (January 2004). "Cytokines in cancer pathogenesis and cancer therapy". Nature Reviews. Cancer. 4 (1): 11–22. doi:10.1038/nrc1252. PMID 14708024.
  51. ^ Dunn GP, Koebel CM, Schreiber RD (November 2006). "Interferons, immunity and cancer immunoediting". Nature Reviews. Immunology. 6 (11): 836–48. doi:10.1038/nri1961. PMID 17063185.
  52. ^ Lasfar A, Abushahba W, Balan M, Cohen-Solal KA (2011). "Interferon lambda: a new sword in cancer immunotherapy". Clinical & Developmental Immunology. 2011: 349575. doi:10.1155/2011/349575. PMC 3235441. PMID 22190970.
  53. ^ Razaghi A, Owens L, Heimann K (December 2016). "Review of the recombinant human interferon gamma as an immunotherapeutic: Impacts of production platforms and glycosylation". Journal of Biotechnology. 240: 48–60. doi:10.1016/j.jbiotec.2016.10.022. PMID 27794496.
  54. ^ Coventry BJ, Ashdown ML (2012). "The 20th anniversary of interleukin-2 therapy: bimodal role explaining longstanding random induction of complete clinical responses". Cancer Management and Research. 4: 215–21. doi:10.2147/cmar.s33979. PMC 3421468. PMID 22904643.
  55. ^ Ott PA, Hodi FS, Kaufman HL, Wigginton JM, Wolchok JD (2017). "Combination immunotherapy: a road map". Journal for Immunotherapy of Cancer. 5: 16. doi:10.1186/s40425-017-0218-5. PMC 5319100. PMID 28239469.
  56. ^ Mahoney KM, Rennert PD, Freeman GJ (August 2015). "Combination cancer immunotherapy and new immunomodulatory targets". Nature Reviews. Drug Discovery. 14 (8): 561–84. doi:10.1038/nrd4591. PMID 26228759.
  57. ^ "Thermal Ablative Therapies and Immune Checkpoint Modulation: Can Locoregional Approaches Effect a Systemic Response?". 2015.
  58. ^ Tang J, Shalabi A, Hubbard-Lucey VM (January 2018). "Comprehensive analysis of the clinical immuno-oncology landscape". Annals of Oncology. 29 (1): 84–91. doi:10.1093/annonc/mdx755. PMID 29228097.
  59. ^ Perry CJ, Muñoz-Rojas AR, Meeth KM, Kellman LN, Amezquita RA, Thakral D, Du VY, Wang JX, Damsky W, Kuhlmann AL, Sher JW, Bosenberg M, Miller-Jensen K, Kaech SM (March 2018). "Myeloid-targeted immunotherapies act in synergy to induce inflammation and antitumor immunity". The Journal of Experimental Medicine. 215 (3): 877–93. doi:10.1084/jem.20171435. PMID 29436395.
  60. ^ Rodell CB, Arlauckas SP, Cuccarese MF, Garris CS, Li R, Ahmed MS, Kohler RH, Pittet MJ, Weissleder R (21 May 2018). "TLR7/8-agonist-loaded nanoparticles promote the polarization of tumour-associated macrophages to enhance cancer immunotherapy". Nature Biomedical Engineering. doi:10.1038/s41551-018-0236-8.
  61. ^ "Coriolus Versicolor". American Cancer Society. Archived from the original on 15 February 2006.
  62. ^ "Cancer Genetics offers the FDA-approved DAKO PD-L1 IHC 22C3 pharmDx companion diagnostic test for KEYTRUDA®". 3 February 2016.
  63. ^ PD-L1 diagnostic tests: a systematic literature review of scoring algorithms and test-validation metrics Margarita Utal et al. February 2018, online. Public Medical Library (NCBI website)
  64. ^ Time is up for PD-L1 testing in lung cancer, S. Dacic, 23 February 2018, from Annals of Oncology, Volume 29 Issue 4, April 2018 (Oxfard Academic website)
  65. ^ Tumor Mutational Burden as an Independent Predictor of Response to Immunotherapy in Diverse Cancers A. Goodman et al. Molecular Cancer Therapeutics magazine, August 2017
  66. ^ Optimism tempered by lack of standardization, Charles Bankhead, 4 May 2018 (Medpage Today website)
  67. ^ FDA Accepts sBLA for First-Line Nivolumab Plus Low-Dose Ipilimumab in NSCLC With Tumor Mutational Burden ≥ 10 mut/mb, 7 February 2018, American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO Post website, mostly repeating a Bristol-Myers Squibb publication)
  68. ^ FDA approves Encorafenib and Binimetinib in combination for unresectable or metastatic melanoma with BRAF mutations 27 June 2018 (FDA website)
  69. ^ Duke U Cancer Fraud Scandal: A Cautionary Tale For Obama's Precision Medicine Push, Faye Flam, 17 February 2015 (Forbes website)
  70. ^ “Liquid biopsies” for cancer screening: Life-saving tests, or overdiagnosis and overtreatment taken to a new level? David Gorski, September 2015, Science-Based Medicine website
  71. ^ A public discussion by cancer patients from 2011 on the melanoma.org website shows costs and claims.
  72. ^ Restifo NP, Dudley ME, Rosenberg SA (March 2012). "Adoptive immunotherapy for cancer: harnessing the T cell response". Nature Reviews. Immunology. 12 (4): 269–81. doi:10.1038/nri3191. PMID 22437939.
  73. ^ Carroll J (December 2013). "Novartis/Penn's customized T cell wows ASH with stellar leukemia data". Fierce Biotech.
  74. ^ Carroll, John (February 2014). "Servier stages an entry into high-stakes CAR-T showdown with Novartis". FierceBiotech.
  75. ^ Regalado A (June 2015). "Biotech's Coming Cancer Cure: Supercharge your immune cells to defeat cancer? Juno Therapeutics believes its treatments can do exactly that". MIT Technology Review.
  76. ^ "CAR T-Cell Therapy: Engineering Patients' Immune Cells to Treat Their Cancers". cancer.gov. 6 December 2013. Retrieved 9 May 2014.
  77. ^ "NIH study demonstrates that a new cancer immunotherapy method could be effective against a wide range of cancers". nih.gov. 8 May 2014. Retrieved 9 May 2014.
  78. ^ Andersen R, Borch TH, Draghi A, Gokuldass A, Rana MA, Pedersen M, Nielsen M, Kongsted P, Kjeldsen JW, Westergaard MC, Radic HD, Chamberlain CA, Holmich LR, Hendel HW, Larsen MS, Met O, Svane IM, Donia M (April 2018). "T cells isolated from patients with checkpoint inhibitor resistant-melanoma are functional and can mediate tumor regression". Ann. Oncol. doi:10.1093/annonc/mdy139. PMID 29688262.
  79. ^ "FDA approval brings first gene therapy to the United States". fda.gov. 30 August 2017. Retrieved 8 November 2017.
  80. ^ Wilhelm M, Smetak M, Schaefer-Eckart K, Kimmel B, Birkmann J, Einsele H, Kunzmann V (February 2014). "Successful adoptive transfer and in vivo expansion of haploidentical γδ T cells". Journal of Translational Medicine. 12: 45. doi:10.1186/1479-5876-12-45. PMC 3926263. PMID 24528541.
  81. ^ Jaiswal S, Chao MP, Majeti R, Weissman IL (June 2010). "Macrophages as mediators of tumor immunosurveillance". Trends in Immunology. 31 (6): 212–19. doi:10.1016/j.it.2010.04.001. PMC 3646798. PMID 20452821.
  82. ^ a b c Weiskopf K (May 2017). "Cancer immunotherapy targeting the CD47/SIRPα axis". European Journal of Cancer. 76: 100–09. doi:10.1016/j.ejca.2017.02.013. PMID 28286286.
  83. ^ Matlung HL, Szilagyi K, Barclay NA, van den Berg TK (March 2017). "The CD47-SIRPα signaling axis as an innate immune checkpoint in cancer". Immunological Reviews. 276 (1): 145–64. doi:10.1111/imr.12527. PMID 28258703.
  84. ^ Veillette A, Chen J (March 2018). "SIRPα-CD47 Immune Checkpoint Blockade in Anticancer Therapy". Trends in Immunology. 39 (3): 173–84. doi:10.1016/j.it.2017.12.005. PMID 29336991.
  85. ^ Ahmed M, Cheung NK (January 2014). "Engineering anti-GD2 monoclonal antibodies for cancer immunotherapy". FEBS Letters. 588 (2): 288–97. doi:10.1016/j.febslet.2013.11.030. PMID 24295643.
  86. ^ a b Pardoll DM (March 2012). "The blockade of immune checkpoints in cancer immunotherapy". Nature Reviews. Cancer. 12 (4): 252–64. doi:10.1038/nrc3239. PMC 4856023. PMID 22437870.
  87. ^ Granier C, De Guillebon E, Blanc C, Roussel H, Badoual C, Colin E, Saldmann A, Gey A, Oudard S, Tartour E (2017). "Mechanisms of action and rationale for the use of checkpoint inhibitors in cancer". ESMO Open. 2 (2): e000213. doi:10.1136/esmoopen-2017-000213. PMC 5518304. PMID 28761757.
  88. ^ Cameron F, Whiteside G, Perry C (May 2011). "Ipilimumab: first global approval". Drugs. 71 (8): 1093–104. doi:10.2165/11594010-000000000-00000. PMID 21668044.
  89. ^ Lynch TJ, Bondarenko I, Luft A, Serwatowski P, Barlesi F, Chacko R, Sebastian M, Neal J, Lu H, Cuillerot JM, Reck M (June 2012). "Ipilimumab in combination with paclitaxel and carboplatin as first-line treatment in stage IIIB/IV non-small-cell lung cancer: results from a randomized, double-blind, multicenter phase II study". Journal of Clinical Oncology. 30 (17): 2046–54. doi:10.1200/JCO.2011.38.4032. PMID 22547592.
  90. ^ Le DT, Lutz E, Uram JN, Sugar EA, Onners B, Solt S, Zheng L, Diaz LA, Donehower RC, Jaffee EM, Laheru DA (September 2013). "Evaluation of ipilimumab in combination with allogeneic pancreatic tumor cells transfected with a GM-CSF gene in previously treated pancreatic cancer". Journal of Immunotherapy. 36 (7): 382–89. doi:10.1097/CJI.0b013e31829fb7a2. PMC 3779664. PMID 23924790.
  91. ^ Clinical trial number NCT01928394 for "A Study of Nivolumab by Itself or Nivolumab Combined With Ipilimumab in Patients With Advanced or Metastatic Solid Tumors" at ClinicalTrials.gov
  92. ^ Postow MA, Callahan MK, Wolchok JD (June 2015). "Immune Checkpoint Blockade in Cancer Therapy". Journal of Clinical Oncology. 33 (17): 1974–82. doi:10.1200/JCO.2014.59.4358. PMC 4980573. PMID 25605845.
  93. ^ a b van Hooren L, Sandin LC, Moskalev I, Ellmark P, Dimberg A, Black P, Tötterman TH, Mangsbo SM (February 2017). "Local checkpoint inhibition of CTLA-4 as a monotherapy or in combination with anti-PD1 prevents the growth of murine bladder cancer". European Journal of Immunology. 47 (2): 385–93. doi:10.1002/eji.201646583. PMID 27873300.
  94. ^ a b Pollack A (18 May 2016). "F.D.A. Approves an Immunotherapy Drug for Bladder Cancer". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 21 May 2016.
  95. ^ Steele A (5 August 2016). "Bristol Myers: Opdivo Failed to Meet Endpoint in Key Lung-Cancer Study". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 5 August 2016.
  96. ^ BeiGene, Ltd. "BeiGene Presents Initial Clinical Data on PD-1 Antibody BGB-A317 at the 2016 American Society of Clinical Oncology Annual Meeting". Globe Newswire.
  97. ^ Roche. "FDA grants priority review for Roche's cancer immunotherapy atezolizumab in specific type of lung cancer".
  98. ^ Merck Group. "Immuno-oncology Avelumab".
  99. ^ Cure today. "Durvalumab continues to progress in treatment of advanced bladder cancer".
  100. ^ Avacta Life Sciences. "Affimer biotherapeutics target cancer's off-switch with PD-L1 inhibitor".
  101. ^ Pfirschke C, Engblom C, Rickelt S, Cortez-Retamozo V, Garris C, Pucci F, et al. (February 2016). "Immunogenic Chemotherapy Sensitizes Tumors to Checkpoint Blockade Therapy". Immunity. 44 (2): 343–54. doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2015.11.024. PMID 26872698.
  102. ^ Fukuhara H, Ino Y, Todo T (October 2016). "Oncolytic virus therapy: A new era of cancer treatment at dawn". Cancer Science. 107 (10): 1373–79. doi:10.1111/cas.13027. PMC 5084676. PMID 27486853.
  103. ^ Haddad D (2017). "Genetically Engineered Vaccinia Viruses As Agents for Cancer Treatment, Imaging, and Transgene Delivery". Frontiers in Oncology. 7: 96. doi:10.3389/fonc.2017.00096. PMC 5440573. PMID 28589082.
  104. ^ Marin-Acevedo JA, Soyano AE, Dholaria B, Knutson KL, Lou Y (January 2018). "Cancer immunotherapy beyond immune checkpoint inhibitors". Journal of Hematology & Oncology. 11 (1): 8. doi:10.1186/s13045-017-0552-6. PMC 5767051. PMID 29329556.
  105. ^ Aleem E (June 2013). "β-Glucans and their applications in cancer therapy: focus on human studies". Anti-Cancer Agents in Medicinal Chemistry. 13 (5): 709–19. doi:10.2174/1871520611313050007. PMID 23140353.
  106. ^ Snyder A, Makarov V, Merghoub T, Yuan J, Zaretsky JM, Desrichard A, Walsh LA, Postow MA, Wong P, Ho TS, Hollmann TJ, Bruggeman C, Kannan K, Li Y, Elipenahli C, Liu C, Harbison CT, Wang L, Ribas A, Wolchok JD, Chan TA (December 2014). "Genetic basis for clinical response to CTLA-4 blockade in melanoma". The New England Journal of Medicine. 371 (23): 2189–99. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1406498. PMC 4315319. PMID 25409260.
  107. ^ Schumacher TN, Schreiber RD (April 2015). "Neoantigens in cancer immunotherapy". Science. 348 (6230): 69–74. Bibcode:2015Sci...348...69S. doi:10.1126/science.aaa4971. PMID 25838375.

External links

- Association for Immunotherapy of Cancer

