Cancer immunotherapy.

Cancer immunotherapy consists of approaches that modify the host immune
system, and/or the utilization of components of the immune system, as cancer
treatment. During the past 25 years, 17 immunologic products have received
regulatory approval based on anticancer activity as single agents and/or in
combination with chemotherapy. These include the nonspecific immune stimulants
BCG and levamisole; the cytokines interferon-Î± and interleukin-2; the
monoclonal antibodies rituximab, ofatumumab, alemtuzumab, trastuzumab,
bevacizumab, cetuximab, and panitumumab; the radiolabeled antibodies Y-90
ibritumomab tiuxetan and I-131 tositumomab; the immunotoxins denileukin
diftitox and gemtuzumab ozogamicin; nonmyeloablative allogeneic transplants
with donor lymphocyte infusions; and the anti-prostate cancer cell-based
therapy sipuleucel-T. All but two of these products are still regularly used
to treat various B- and T-cell malignancies, and numerous solid tumors,
including breast, lung, colorectal, prostate, melanoma, kidney, glioblastoma,
bladder, and head and neck. Positive randomized trials have recently been
reported for idiotype vaccines in lymphoma and a peptide vaccine in melanoma.
The anti-CTLA-4 monoclonal antibody ipilumumab, which blocks regulatory
T-cells, is expected to receive regulatory approval in the near future, based
on a randomized trial in melanoma. As the fourth modality of cancer treatment,
biotherapy/immunotherapy is an increasingly important component of the
anticancer armamentarium.

