Immunotherapy - Canadian Cancer Society

Our immune system has the ability to find and destroy cancer cells. But cancer
cells can sometimes hide from the immune system and avoid being destroyed.
Cancer cells may also stop the immune system from working properly.
Immunotherapy helps to strengthen or restore the immune system’s ability to
fight cancer.

Immunotherapy is sometimes called biological therapy. You may also hear the
term immune-oncology, which is the study of how the immune system interacts
with cancer cells in order to find ways to prevent or treat cancer.

The immune system and how immunotherapy works

The immune system defends and protects our bodies from infection and disease.
It is made up of organs, special cells and substances that work together to
find and fight germs such as viruses or bacteria or abnormal or unhealthy
cells that cause disease such as cancer. Germs and cancer cells have molecules
on their surface (called antigens) that trigger the immune system to find and
destroy them. But some cancer cells can hide from the immune system because
they look a lot like normal cells. In some cases, the immune system may find
cancer cells, but it isn’t strong enough to destroy all of them. And some
cancer cells can even change how the immune system responds so it doesn’t work
properly.

Immunotherapy boosts the immune system or helps the immune system to find
cancer and attack it. Immunotherapy is used to:

stop or slow the growth of cancer
stop cancer from spreading to other parts of the body
help the immune system work better to destroy cancer cells
deliver toxins, such as radiation or chemotherapy, directly to cancer cells

Learn more about the immune system.

Types of immunotherapy

Different types of immunotherapy are used to treat cancer.

Monoclonal antibodies

Monoclonal antibodies are made in the lab. Like the antibodies that your
immune system makes, their job is to trigger an immune system reaction. Some
monoclonal antibodies work by finding a specific antigen (such as a protein)
on a cancer cell and then attaching to it. The immune system then knows to
attack and destroy those cells. One example of this type of monoclonal
antibody is rituximab (Rituxan). Rituximab is used to treat some types of non-
Hodgkin lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).

Monoclonal antibodies are also a targeted therapy because they block or target
an abnormal gene or protein in a cancer cell. They also work by:

blocking growth signals and receptors that cause cancer to grow
delivering radiation or chemotherapy to cancer cells

Immune checkpoint inhibitors

The immune system normally stops T cells (a type of immune system cell) from
attacking normal cells in the body by using proteins called checkpoints.
Checkpoints are part of a pathway that the immune system uses to slow down or
put the brakes on an immune system response. Some cancer cells can send
signals that confuse T cells by turning on a checkpoint pathway and stopping
them from attacking cancer cells. This lets the cancer continue to grow
because the cancer cells hide from the immune system.

Immune checkpoint inhibitors are monoclonal antibodies that work by blocking
checkpoint proteins so that immune system cells can attack and kill the cancer
cells. They are used to treat melanoma skin cancer, non–small cell lung
cancer, kidney cancer and Hodgkin lymphoma.

There are 2 immune checkpoint pathways that can be blocked to allow the immune
system to fight cancer. PD-1 is an immune checkpoint that stops T cells from
attacking other cells in the body. It does this by attaching to PD-L1, a
protein found on some normal and cancer cells. Some cancer cells have a lot of
PD-L1, which helps protect them from being attacked by T cells. Monoclonal
antibodies such as atezolizumab (Tecentriq), pembrolizumab (Keytruda) and
nivolumab (Opdivo) target PD-1 or PD-L1 to help boost the immune system’s
response to attack cancer cells and destroy them.

CTLA-4 is another immune checkpoint on T cells that the monoclonal antibody
ipilimumab (Yervoy) can target. This helps boost the immune system’s response
against cancer cells.

Conjugated monoclonal antibodies

Monoclonal antibodies can be used to deliver radiation or chemotherapy.
Monoclonal antibodies used to deliver radiation are attached to radioactive
substances called radioactive isotopes. The antibodies help find and bind to
cancer cells, and they then release the radiation to destroy the cancer cells.

When monoclonal antibodies are used to carry radioactive substances this
treatment is also called radioimmunotherapy. Ibritumomab (Zevalin) is a type
of radioimmunotherapy. It is made up of a monoclonal antibody and the
radioactive isotope yttrium-90. It is used to treat some types of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma.

Monoclonal antibodies are sometimes attached to chemotherapy drugs to make
antibody drug conjugates. Brentuximab vedotin (Adcetris) is an antibody drug
conjugate that targets a protein on the surface of cancer cells in people with
Hodgkin lymphoma. Trastuzumab emtansine (Kadcyla or T-DM1) is another type of
antibody drug conjugate that is sometimes used to treat women with
HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer.

Non-specific immunotherapy

Non-specific immunotherapy uses cytokines, growth factors and other substances
to give the immune system a boost to fight cancer. Cytokines are chemicals in
the body that trigger the immune system to fight disease or germs that get
into the body. But cytokines can also be made in the lab and used to treat
cancer.

Interferon is a type of cytokine made by the body. Interferon that is made in
a lab to treat cancer is called interferon alfa (Intron A, Wellferon).
Interferon can help trigger a stronger immune response against cancer cells
and may also slow the growth of cancer or cause cancer cells to die.
Interferon alfa is used to treat melanoma and some types of blood cancers such
as non-Hodgkin lymphoma and chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML).

Interleukin is another cytokine made by the body. Interleukin-2 (Proleukin)
can be made in a lab. It helps the body to make more of certain types of
immune cells that boost the immune system’s response. It also helps the body
to make more antibodies against cancer cells. This helps the immune system to
find cancer cells and destroy them. Interleukin-2 is sometimes used to treat
kidney cancer and melanoma.

Granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) and granulocyte-macrophage
colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) are blood growth factors that stimulate the
bone marrow to make more granulocytes and macrophages, which are types of
white blood cells that help fight infection. G-CSF and GM-CSF can also be
given to boost the immune system along with other types of immunotherapy.

Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) is a type of bacteria that has been changed in
the lab so it doesn’t cause disease. It causes inflammation in the bladder,
which triggers an immune response to help attack and destroy cancer cells. BCG
is used to treat early-stage bladder cancer.

Toll-like receptor agonists are drugs that bind to toll-like receptors and
cause an immune response that kills cancer cells. Toll-like receptors are
found on the surface of most immune cells that can detect cancer cells and
other germs in the body. When the receptors detect cancer cells or germs, this
signals immune cells to attack. Imiquimod (Aldara) is a toll-like receptor
agonist that is sometimes used to treat early-stage basal cell carcinoma, a
type of non-melanoma skin cancer.

Immunomodulating drugs

Immunomodulating drugs boost the immune system, but we need more research to
understand how they do this. Immunomodulating drugs include thalidomide
(Thalomid), lenalidomide (Revlimid) and pomalidomide (Pomalyst). They are used
to treat multiple myeloma and some other types of cancer.

Getting immunotherapy

You may have immunotherapy in different ways. It may be given as pills or
capsules that are swallowed (orally), by needle into a vein (intravenously) or
applied to the skin (topically).

Some immunotherapy drugs can only be given in the hospital. You can take
others at home.

Immunotherapy is based on a set schedule, or protocol, that is based on your
specific condition. Each course of treatment usually involves a treatment
period followed by a recovery period.

You may have immunotherapy as a treatment on its own, but it is also used with
other types of therapy, such as chemotherapy, radiation therapy or both.

Side effects of immunotherapy

Side effects can happen with any type of treatment. Most side effects of
immunotherapy are mild and go away once the body gets used to the drug. If
side effects are severe, your doctor may stop the therapy for a period of time
or adjust the dose. Side effects of immunotherapy will depend mainly on the:

type of drug, combination of drugs or combination of treatment
dose
how the drug is given (for example, by mouth or vein)
your overall health

Everyone’s experience is different, but you may have these side effects with
immunotherapy:

Flu-like symptoms

Flu-like symptoms are a common side effect of immunotherapy. You may have
fever, chills, muscle and joint aches or pain, nausea, vomiting or loss of
appetite (anorexia).

These symptoms often occur immediately after treatment. Giving the injection
before bedtime and taking other medicines, such as acetaminophen (Tylenol),
can help reduce these side effects. You may even be able to sleep through
them.

Flu-like symptoms usually go away with continued therapy, once the body gets
used to the drug. Check with your doctor or healthcare team if these symptoms
do not go away or are bothersome.

Fatigue

Fatigue makes you feel more tired than usual and can interfere with daily
activities and sleep. Fatigue is a common, temporary problem that can happen
with some types of immunotherapy. It is often related to the dose of the drug
given and usually goes along with flu-like symptoms.

Find out more about fatigue.

Skin reactions

Some immunotherapy drugs can give you a rash and make your skin itchy. This
can happen during treatment and may last after treatment. Tell the healthcare
team if you experience these skin changes. They can suggest moisturizers and
creams and may prescribe medicines to relieve the itchiness.

Some people also have a skin reaction where the needle is injected including
swelling, redness, itchiness, rash and soreness.

Birth defects

The immunomodulating drugs thalidomide, lenalidomide and pomalidomide can
cause severe birth defects if you are pregnant when you take them.

Report side effects

Be sure to report side effects to the healthcare team. Your team is there to
help. Side effects can happen any time during, immediately after or a few days
or weeks after immunotherapy. Sometimes late side effects develop months or
years later. Most side effects go away on their own or can be treated, but
some side effects may last a long time or become permanent.

