Stand Up To Cancer

  Your Body Your Hope

 Your immune system may be the key to beating cancer.

> Stand Up To Cancer has had a major role in galvanizing immunotherapy
approaches. The big opportunity is to take immunotherapy from the early stage
ideas and get it out to where the public can benefit.

>

> Carl H. June, MD

> Leader SU2C-Lustgarten Foundation CAR T Cell Translational Research Team

>

 What is immunotherapy?

Immunotherapy, an exciting approach to cancer treatment, works by empowering
your body’s own immune system to correctly identify and eradicate cancer
cells. This approach has been used to effectively fight many types of cancer,
with new research leading to greater hope each day.

What cancers can immunotherapy be used for?

Immunotherapy enables the immune system to recognize and target cancer cells,
making it a universal form of treatment. Currently, immunotherapy can be used
to treat forms of these cancers:

Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia
Bladder Cancer
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
Folicular Lymphoma
Hairy Cell Leukemia
Head and Neck Cancer
Hodgkin Lymphoma

Kidney (Renal) Cancer
Lung Cancer
Mantle Cell Lymphoma
Melanoma
Multiple Myeloma
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma

Many researchers believe it has the power to be the cure for all cancer types,
including:

Brain Cancer
Breast Cancer
Cervical
Colorectal
Esophageal
Liver

Ovarian
Pancreatic
Prostate
Sarcoma
Stomach

 Why are immunotherapy clinical trials important?

Currently, only six active immunotherapies have been approved for cancer,
meaning hundreds of other new and promising cancer immunotherapy treatments
are only available to patients in clinical trials. Participation in these
types of clinical trials may be the most promising treatment option for
patients facing cancer today and is critical to the development and approval
of these treatments in the future.

 How do I know if immunotherapy is right for me?

Don’t hesitate to ask questions. Talk to your doctor, research nurse and the
rest of your medical care team about clinical trials they might recommend or
ones you’ve found online. They are often your best resource for helping you
navigate available treatment options.

In general, the questions you will want to ask are similar to those you would
ask your doctor about any type of treatment. Knowing both your treatment and
clinical trial options will help you make the most informed decision.

If your doctor recommends a trial, you will want to learn more about what
treatment the trial involves, possible side effects from the treatment,
financial responsibility, if travel is involved and how long the treatment
will last.

QUESTIONS TO ASK YOUR DOCTOR 

  Find A Trial

 Take The Next Step

The latest cancer treatment advances, like immunotherapy, have been made
possible because of patients who have participated in clinical trials.

 Speak To An Expert

SU2C is pleased to connect interested parties with EmergingMed, a free and
confidential trial matching service that will help guide you through a search
and referral process to find a clinical trial that may be right for you.

Monday – Friday 9:00 am – 6:00 pm ET

Se Habla Espanol

OR

 Fill Out The Form Below

A Clinical Trial Navigator will be in touch with you within one business day
to answer your questions about clinical trials and help guide you through the
search process.

  Learn about the SU2C Scientific Research Teams hard at work on
immunotherapy treatments.

SU2C is proud to be among the organizations at the forefront of immunotherapy
research and clinical trials, through SU2C Dream Teams and SU2C Research
Grants.

To learn more about SU2C Catalyst® teams that are focusing on immunotherapy
visit  SU2C.org/Catalyst.

Below are the SU2C research teams focusing on immunotherapy:

  Additional Resources on Immunotherapy

Stand Up To Cancer (SU2C) is a division of the Entertainment Industry
Foundation (EIF), a 501(c)(3) tax-exempt organization. SU2C raises funds to
accelerate the pace of research that will get new therapies to patients
quickly and save lives now. In this new campaign and public service
announcement (PSA), supported by a charitable donation from Bristol-Myers
Squibb, SU2C is helping to increase the awareness around immunotherapy.

The content appearing on this website is provided for informational purposes
only. NOTHING CONTAINED ON THIS WEBSITE IS INTENDED TO BE FOR MEDICAL
DIAGNOSIS OR TREATMENT OF ANY ILLNESS, CONDITION OR DISEASE. INFORMATION ON
THIS WEBSITE SHOULD NOT BE RELIED UPON FOR PERSONAL OR MEDICAL DECISIONS OF
ANY KIND. ALWAYS SEEK THE ADVICE OF YOUR PHYSICIAN OR OTHER QUALIFIED
HEALTHCARE PROVIDER REGARDING ANY HEALTHCARE QUESTIONS.

  

PSA photos provided by: ©2017, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,
ajijchan / Thinkstock, Alex Ritter, Jennifer Lippincott Schwartz and Gillian
Griffiths, National Institutes of Health, Chad Baker / Thinkstock, Chris
Harvey / Thinkstock, danez / Thinkstock, ifc2 / Thinkstock, iStock.com /
Azemdega, iStock.com / bst2012, iStock.com / filadendron, iStock.com /
Gerville, iStock.com / Inok, iStock.com / miljko, iStock.com /
monkeybusinessimages, iStock.com / PeopleImages, iStock.com / Rawpixel Ltd,
iStock.com / RonTech2000, iStock.com / vshivkova, iStock.com / wundervisuals,
iStock.com / Yagi-Studio, Julio C. Valencia, NCI Center for Cancer Research,
McBain Laboratory, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development,
National Institutes of Health, National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health

