Last resort cancer immunotherapy treatments should become first choice,
experts say after trial success

Cutting edge cancer treatments which are currently held back as a last resort
for patients with no other options could mean people “live years longer” when
used as a first choice, experts have said.

Immunotherapies, which reprogramme the immune system to identify and attack
tumours, are a promising, but experimental group of treatments usually given
after aggressive chemotherapy has failed.

Join Independent Minds

For exclusive articles, events and an advertising-free read for just £5.99
€6.99 $9.99 a month

Start your free trial

Get the best of The Independent

With an Independent Minds subscription for just £5.99 €6.99 $9.99 a month

Start your free trial

Get the best of The Independent

Without the ads – for just £5.99 €6.99 $9.99 a month

Start your free trial

Results from a pair of clinical trials in patients with advanced, treatment
resistant cancers found immunotherapy increased survival, with fewer side-
effects, when used immediately.

Experts said this shows more needs to be done to make these experimental
treatments available to patients when they can provide the most benefit,
rather than holding off because of risks or costs.

Both sets of findings were reported at the European Society for Medical
Oncology Congress in Berlin.

The first of the trials, led by the Institute of Cancer Research and Royal
Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, looked at the immunotherapy drug pembrolizumab
in nearly 900 patients with advanced head and neck cancers. The disease had
returned to them after treatment or spread throughout the body.

But the immunotherapy drug increased life expectancy by 40 per cent when
compared to radical chemotherapy.

Among patients where the drug worked best, median life expectancy after
diagnosis was 15 months, compared to 11 months for those given the usual
cocktail of chemotherapy and targeted cancer drugs.

Only 17 per cent of patients experienced serious side-effects, compared to 69
per cent on extreme chemotherapy.

The downside of immunotherapies is that not every patient will respond, but
modern genetic testing methods can allow doctors to identify which tumours are
likely to be vulnerable to certain drugs.

In pembrolizumab’s case, it only worked in around 23 per cent of patients,
compared to 36 per cent given chemotherapy.

It was most effective in those whose tumours have particular markers for the
immune system to target.

In cases where the drug worked best median cases the results were
“unbelievable”, the ICR researchers said.

“We couldn’t believe it when we saw the results,” said Professor Kevin
Harrington, who led the study. “None of us expected pembrolizumab on its own
to work so well in some of these patients – and it raises the prospect that we
could spare some people chemotherapy altogether.”

left Created with Sketch. right Created with Sketch.

  Shape Created with Sketch. Science news in pictures

1/18 Baby mice tears could be used in pest control

A study from the University of Tokyo has found that the tears of baby mice
cause female mice to be less interested in the sexual advances of males

Getty

2/18 Final warning to limit "climate catastrophe"

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has issued a report which
projects the impact of a rise in global temperatures of 1.5 degrees Celsius
and warns against a higher increase

Getty

3/18 Nobel prize for evolution chemists

The nobel prize for chemistry has been awarded to three chemists working with
evolution. Frances Smith is being awarded the prize for her work on directing
the evolution of enzymes, while Gregory Winter and George Smith take the prize
for their work on phage display of peptides and antibodies

Getty/AFP

4/18 Nobel prize for laser physicists

The nobel prize for physics has been awarded to three physicists working with
lasers. Arthur Ashkin (L) was awarded for his "optical tweezers" which use
lasers to grab particles, atoms, viruses and other living cells. Donna
Strickland and Gérard Mourou were jointly awarded the prize for developing
chirped-pulse amplification of lasers

Reuters/AP

5/18 Discovery of a new species of dinosaur

The Ledumahadi Mafube roamed around 200 million years ago in what is now South
Africa. Recently discovered by a team of international scientists, it was the
largest land animal of its time, weighing 12 tons and standing at 13 feet. In
Sesotho, the South African language of the region in which the dinosaur was
discovered, its name means "a giant thunderclap at dawn"

Viktor Radermacher / SWNS

6/18 Birth of a planet

Scientists have witnessed the birth of a planet for the first time ever. This
spectacular image from the SPHERE instrument on ESO's Very Large Telescope is
the first clear image of a planet caught in the very act of formation around
the dwarf star PDS 70. The planet stands clearly out, visible as a bright
point to the right of the center of the image, which is blacked out by the
coronagraph mask used to block the blinding light of the central star.

ESO/A. Müller et al

7/18 New human organ discovered that was previously missed by scientists

Layers long thought to be dense, connective tissue are actually a series of
fluid-filled compartments researchers have termed the “interstitium”. These
compartments are found beneath the skin, as well as lining the gut, lungs,
blood vessels and muscles, and join together to form a network supported by a
mesh of strong, flexible proteins

Getty

8/18 Previously unknown society lived in Amazon rainforest before Europeans
arrived, say archaeologists

Working in the Brazilian state of Mato Grosso, a team led by archaeologists at
the University of Exeter unearthed hundreds of villages hidden in the depths
of the rainforest. These excavations included evidence of fortifications and
mysterious earthworks called geoglyphs

José Iriarte

9/18 One in 10 people have traces of cocaine or heroin on fingerprints,
study finds

More than one in 10 people were found to have traces of class A drugs on their
fingers by scientists developing a new fingerprint-based drug test. Using
sensitive analysis of the chemical composition of sweat, researchers were able
to tell the difference between those who had been directly exposed to heroin
and cocaine, and those who had encountered it indirectly.

Getty

10/18 Nasa releases stunning images of Jupiter's great red spot

The storm bigger than the Earth, has been swhirling for 350 years. The image's
colours have been enhanced after it was sent back to Earth.

Pictures by: Tom Momary

11/18 A 3D reconstruction of an African grey parrot post euthanasia

Included in Wellcome Image Awards, this 3D image of an African grey parrot
shows the highly intricate system of blood vessels.

Scott Birch. Wellcome Images

12/18 Baby Hawaiian bobtail squid

Another Wellcome Images Award winner, this time of baby Hawaiian bobtail
squid. The black ink sac and light organ in the centre of the squid’s mantle
cavity can be clearly seen.

Macroscopic Solutions. Wellcome Images

13/18 Skeletons of 5,000-year-old Chinese ‘giants’ discovered by
archaeologists

The people are thought to have been unusually tall and strong. The tallest of
the skeletons uncovered measured at 1.9m

YouTube

14/18 Nasa discovers 75,000 mile-wide hole in the Sun

Sunspots are caused by interactions with the Sun’s magnetic field and are
cooler areas on the star’s surface.

Nasa

15/18 View(active tab) Apple News Breaking news email Edit Revisions
Workflow Clear Cache NewsScience 132 million-year-old dinosaur fossil found at
factory in Surrey

Paleontologists Sarah Moore and Jamie Jordan believe they have discovered a
Iguanodon dinosaur, a herbivore that was around three metres tall and 10
metres long

Cambridge Photographers/Wienerberger

16/18 Discovering life on Mars is less likely as researchers find toxic
chemicals on its surface

The Echus Chasma, one of the largest water source regions on Mars

Getty Images

17/18 The Grand Prismatic Spring, the largest in the United States and
third largest in the world, is seen in Yellowstone National Park.

The park is famous for its geothermal activity – which includes its
spectacular, flowing springs as well as the famous "Old Faithful" geyser that
sprays water out every hour or so.

REUTERS/Jim Urquhart

18/18 An iris clip fitted onto the eye

This images is apart of the Wellcome Images Awards and shows how an artificial
intraocular lens is fitted onto the eye. Used for conditions such as myopia
and cataracts.

Cambridge University Hospitals NHS FT. Wellcome Images

1/18 Baby mice tears could be used in pest control

A study from the University of Tokyo has found that the tears of baby mice
cause female mice to be less interested in the sexual advances of males

Getty

2/18 Final warning to limit "climate catastrophe"

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has issued a report which
projects the impact of a rise in global temperatures of 1.5 degrees Celsius
and warns against a higher increase

Getty

3/18 Nobel prize for evolution chemists

The nobel prize for chemistry has been awarded to three chemists working with
evolution. Frances Smith is being awarded the prize for her work on directing
the evolution of enzymes, while Gregory Winter and George Smith take the prize
for their work on phage display of peptides and antibodies

Getty/AFP

4/18 Nobel prize for laser physicists

The nobel prize for physics has been awarded to three physicists working with
lasers. Arthur Ashkin (L) was awarded for his "optical tweezers" which use
lasers to grab particles, atoms, viruses and other living cells. Donna
Strickland and Gérard Mourou were jointly awarded the prize for developing
chirped-pulse amplification of lasers

Reuters/AP

5/18 Discovery of a new species of dinosaur

The Ledumahadi Mafube roamed around 200 million years ago in what is now South
Africa. Recently discovered by a team of international scientists, it was the
largest land animal of its time, weighing 12 tons and standing at 13 feet. In
Sesotho, the South African language of the region in which the dinosaur was
discovered, its name means "a giant thunderclap at dawn"

Viktor Radermacher / SWNS

6/18 Birth of a planet

Scientists have witnessed the birth of a planet for the first time ever. This
spectacular image from the SPHERE instrument on ESO's Very Large Telescope is
the first clear image of a planet caught in the very act of formation around
the dwarf star PDS 70. The planet stands clearly out, visible as a bright
point to the right of the center of the image, which is blacked out by the
coronagraph mask used to block the blinding light of the central star.

ESO/A. Müller et al

7/18 New human organ discovered that was previously missed by scientists

Layers long thought to be dense, connective tissue are actually a series of
fluid-filled compartments researchers have termed the “interstitium”. These
compartments are found beneath the skin, as well as lining the gut, lungs,
blood vessels and muscles, and join together to form a network supported by a
mesh of strong, flexible proteins

Getty

8/18 Previously unknown society lived in Amazon rainforest before Europeans
arrived, say archaeologists

Working in the Brazilian state of Mato Grosso, a team led by archaeologists at
the University of Exeter unearthed hundreds of villages hidden in the depths
of the rainforest. These excavations included evidence of fortifications and
mysterious earthworks called geoglyphs

José Iriarte

9/18 One in 10 people have traces of cocaine or heroin on fingerprints,
study finds

More than one in 10 people were found to have traces of class A drugs on their
fingers by scientists developing a new fingerprint-based drug test. Using
sensitive analysis of the chemical composition of sweat, researchers were able
to tell the difference between those who had been directly exposed to heroin
and cocaine, and those who had encountered it indirectly.

Getty

10/18 Nasa releases stunning images of Jupiter's great red spot

The storm bigger than the Earth, has been swhirling for 350 years. The image's
colours have been enhanced after it was sent back to Earth.

Pictures by: Tom Momary

11/18 A 3D reconstruction of an African grey parrot post euthanasia

Included in Wellcome Image Awards, this 3D image of an African grey parrot
shows the highly intricate system of blood vessels.

Scott Birch. Wellcome Images

12/18 Baby Hawaiian bobtail squid

Another Wellcome Images Award winner, this time of baby Hawaiian bobtail
squid. The black ink sac and light organ in the centre of the squid’s mantle
cavity can be clearly seen.

Macroscopic Solutions. Wellcome Images

13/18 Skeletons of 5,000-year-old Chinese ‘giants’ discovered by
archaeologists

The people are thought to have been unusually tall and strong. The tallest of
the skeletons uncovered measured at 1.9m

YouTube

14/18 Nasa discovers 75,000 mile-wide hole in the Sun

Sunspots are caused by interactions with the Sun’s magnetic field and are
cooler areas on the star’s surface.

Nasa

15/18 View(active tab) Apple News Breaking news email Edit Revisions
Workflow Clear Cache NewsScience 132 million-year-old dinosaur fossil found at
factory in Surrey

Paleontologists Sarah Moore and Jamie Jordan believe they have discovered a
Iguanodon dinosaur, a herbivore that was around three metres tall and 10
metres long

Cambridge Photographers/Wienerberger

16/18 Discovering life on Mars is less likely as researchers find toxic
chemicals on its surface

The Echus Chasma, one of the largest water source regions on Mars

Getty Images

17/18 The Grand Prismatic Spring, the largest in the United States and
third largest in the world, is seen in Yellowstone National Park.

The park is famous for its geothermal activity – which includes its
spectacular, flowing springs as well as the famous "Old Faithful" geyser that
sprays water out every hour or so.

REUTERS/Jim Urquhart

18/18 An iris clip fitted onto the eye

This images is apart of the Wellcome Images Awards and shows how an artificial
intraocular lens is fitted onto the eye. Used for conditions such as myopia
and cataracts.

Cambridge University Hospitals NHS FT. Wellcome Images

He added that it could have major implications for these patients, and said:
“The trial is still ongoing, but we expect some patients to go on to live for
years longer than they would have done had they received standard
chemotherapy.”

Another study presented at the conference on Monday looked at immunotherapy
treatment in colorectal cancer which had spread.

In around 4 per cent of colorectal cancer patients, the tumour carries a
mutation which affects DNA repair and these patients typically survive between
14-19 months after survival, compared to up to 25 months for other types.

The early stage trial, led by University of Southern California researchers,
found that 84 per cent of patients saw at least some shrinkage of their
tumours when given the immunotherapy drug nivolumab instead of chemotherapy.

After 12 months 77 per cent were alive with no progression in their tumours.

Professor Paul Workman, chief executive of the Institute of Cancer Research
said the findings show immunotherapy’s potential as a “smarter, kinder and
more effective first-line treatment”.

“We now need to do two things to ensure more patients can benefit from
immunotherapy – develop ways of getting these drugs to work in a higher
proportion of patients, and come to an agreement over the cost of these drugs
to make them more affordable for the NHS.”

