People Who Are Obese Respond Better to Some Cancer Immunotherapy Drugs


In a surprising and counterintuitive finding, researchers say they have
evidence that cancer patients who are obese respond better than normal-weight
cancer patients to a category of immunotherapy drugs known as checkpoint
inhibitors. The study, published November 12 in the journal Nature Medicine,
may help doctors better predict which patients will respond to the drugs.

Previous research has shown convincingly that obesity increases the risk of
several types of cancer, including breast, prostate, pancreatic, liver, and
endometrial cancer. Obesity also suppresses the immune system and appears to
promote cancer development, recurrence, and lower survival rates.

But in the new studies, researchers found that obese mice given checkpoint
inhibitors to treat cancer survived significantly longer than non-obese mice.
And in a study of 251 human patients with melanoma treated with checkpoint
inhibitors, obese patients had better outcomes compared with non-obese
patients.

“What we  found with obese mouse, monkey, and man is that there was more
immune suppression. But when we applied a checkpoint inhibitor, we saw the
greater effect,” says William Murphy, MD, a coauthor of the new study and a
distinguished professor at the University of California Davis School of
Medicine.

The finding was especially unexpected, Dr. Murphy says, because older
immunotherapies, such as interleukin-2, caused serious side effects,
particularly in those who were overweight. “With interleukin-2, the obese and
older mice would die even though the younger mice would be okay,” he says.
“The paradigm was that obesity and aging caused chronic inflammation, and
giving the immune system more gasoline (immunotherapy drugs) pushes it over
the edge.”


Learning to Understand How Checkpoint Inhibitors Work

The newer immunotherapies, such as the checkpoint inhibitor Keytruda
(pembrolizumab), have revolutionized the cancer field in recent years,
dramatically improving survival times for patients with certain types of
cancer, such as melanoma and lung cancer, considered very difficult to treat
effectively. But the drugs don’t work in everyone, and it’s not clear why.

Some cancers, like many lung cancers and melanomas, express the protein PD-L1
on their surface, which allows cancer cells to hide from immune system fighter
cells, called T cells. Checkpoint inhibitor drugs target these proteins and
disable them, allowing T cells to see and attack cancer cells. They are
believed to work best in people whose cancers express high levels of PD-1
proteins.

But even within this group of patients, responses can be varied. It may be
that the success of these medications may also depend on individual patient
characteristics that govern the health of the immune system, such as age,
gender, body mass index, diet, the patient’s microbiome and the timing of
treatment, Murphy says.


Why Might Obesity Help Checkpoint Inhibitors Work?

Checkpoint inhibitors produce a different effect in the obese population of
patients than past immunotherapy agents because they work differently, says
Murphy. “With checkpoint inhibitors, you are taking your foot off the immune-
system brakes, but not giving it more gas,” he says. “Checkpoint inhibitors
don’t really stimulate the immune system. They allow the immune system to
work.”

Studies also show that leptin, the hormone that is produced by the body’s fat
cells, is linked to increased expression of the PD-1 checkpoint protein on T
cells in both mice and humans. That means that, in cancers that affect people
who are obese, checkpoint inhibitors may have more targets.

RELATED: Immunotherapy Drug Opdivo Approved for Liver Cancer

Using Checkpoint Inhibitors Strategically

Researchers should take body mass index (a measure of obesity) into account in
cancer immunotherapy studies going forward, says Murphy. Likewise, researchers
who use mice as models to test immunotherapy drugs should address what happens
to mice who are fed a high-fat diet to produce obesity — which is typical in
many lab studies — compared with mice that are fed a typical Western diet
containing more sugar.

The research also has implications for improving checkpoint immunotherapy
effectiveness. “When you go through cancer therapy, what kind of diet should
you be eating?” says Murphy. “People often lose weight and muscle mass during
cancer. Maybe we can find a way to manipulate the diet to make cancer therapy
work better. For a short-term intervention, it may be worth any risk.”


