Cancer Immunotherapy

How can we get the immune system to cure cancer?

Groundbreaking Interventions

Dr. Antoni Ribas develops groundbreaking immunotherapies, interventions that
mobilize the immune system to fight cancer. By studying the cellular
mechanisms driving—or inhibiting—an immune response to cancer, Dr. Ribas
uncovers techniques to activate our natural defenses.

Dr. Ribas’s discoveries have helped many patients fight cancer when nothing
else worked.

Giving T Cells a "Green Light" to Fight Cancer

To allow T cells to fight cancer, Dr. Ribas tried blocking the programmed
death-1 (PD-1) protein, a receptor cancer manipulates to evade immune
response.

He found that pembrolizimab—a drug developed by Merck to block PD-1—helped
many patients fight their cancer. Read more in PD-1 Blockade Induces Responses
by Inhibiting Adaptive Immune Resistance, published in Nature.


However, PD-1 blockade did not help all patients, and Dr. Ribas wanted to know
why.

Bolstering Cancer Immunotherapies with Oncolytic Viruses

Dr. Ribas combined pembrolizimab with an oncolytic virus, injected at the
tumor site. He believed the virus—a foreign invader—would lure T cells toward
cancer tumors and boost the efficacy of PD-1 blockade.

The combined therapy increased T cells at tumor sites and stimulated a
complete response in 33% of patients. Read more in Oncolytic Virotherapy
Promotes Intratumoral T Cell Infiltration and Improves Anti-PD-1
Immunotherapy, the first phase 1 clinical trial report ever published in Cell.

With his sights set on optimizing cancer immunotherapy, Dr. Ribas plans to
learn as much as he can by testing new treatments, including adoptive cell
transfer therapy, and investigating the underlying immune system mechanisms
that render treatments effective or ineffective.

The Future of Cancer Immunotherapy

Dr. Ribas wants to uncover the limits and potentials of the human immune
system in the fight against cancer, a pursuit rooted in scientific
understanding. When it comes to cancer, Dr. Ribas believes we can always know
more about getting the immune system to fight back.
