Cancer immunotherapy spreads rapidly

A revolution is underway in cancer therapy, raising the spectre of hope for
patients whose cancers are difficult or impossible to treat with surgery,
radiotherapy or conventional chemotherapy. Immunotherapy, where the body’s
immune system is primed to kill cancer cells in some way, is already making
waves – and this year’s Nobel prize for medicine went to two pioneers.

The winners, Tasuko Honjo and James Allison, discovered and developed ways of
getting T-cells to recognise and kill cancer cells by switching on the immune
response via checkpoint inhibitors. These drugs, in effect, turn off the
biological brakes that keep the immune response in check. Those pioneered by
Honjo act at programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) or its ligand PD-L1, while
Allison’s work looked at cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4).

Both mechanisms have had successes. The first checkpoint inhibitor to reach
the market, in 2011, was Bristol-Myers Squibb’s ipilimumab (Yervoy), and it is
thus far the only one that acts at CTLA-4. The other six all interact with
PD-1 or PD-L1 . The most recent to reach the market, the PD-1
inhibitor cemiplimab (Libtayo) from Sanofi and Regeneron, gained US approval
in September. An enormous number more are in the pipeline across the industry.
A bispecific antibody that hits both CTLA-4 and PD-L1 has even been developed
by Chinese company Alphamab, and is in early clinical trials in Australia.

  
Unlike the earlier approvals, which were for some of the more common cancer
types including non-small cell lung cancer, melanoma and bladder cancer,
Sanofi’s cemiplimab was approved to treat a less common skin cancer, cutaneous
squamous cell carcinoma. Moving into new indications is one way that companies
might succeed in the increasingly crowded market, according to GlobalData
senior analyst Chloe Thepaut.

‘We can see from our Pharma Intelligence database that checkpoint inhibitors
are being trialled in all sorts of indications where checkpoint inhibitors
don’t already have approval,’ she says. And Merck & Co’s pembrolizumab
(Keytruda) has had its licence extended to any solid tumour with the correct
biomarker, she adds. ‘This pan-tumour approach, rather than indication-
specific, is likely to continue. By using different biomarker expression to
direct which patients can receive the drug, they can target indications that
don’t already have approved checkpoint inhibitors.’

Mix and match

Increasingly, checkpoint inhibitors are being used in combination, either with
another immunotherapy or more traditional therapy. A quick search for clinical
trials for cancer immunotherapy on clinicaltrials.gov in early October showed
up nearly 2300 studies – of which over 850 were actively recruiting – and more
than a third of these involve combinations.

Checkpoint inhibitors might be combined with a targeted therapy such as
trastuzumab (Roche’s Herceptin) for breast cancer, for example, to increase
the chances of therapeutic success. Promising results have already been
reported for some combinations, including Phase III results earlier this year
for pembrolizumab in non-small cell lung cancer, given with Lilly’s pemetrexed
(Alimta) and platinum-based chemotherapy.

Thepaut says GlobalData interviews earlier this year highlighted the interest
in combinations. ‘Checkpoint inhibitors will not be effective in all
patients,’ she says. ‘If combinations did not add significant toxicity and
improved efficacy, this was viewed as a promising approach.’ But there was
little consensus about which combinations were likely to be most effective.

With so much activity in the cancer field, it is increasingly difficult to
recruit sufficient trial subjects. There is a lot of competition for a limited
number of patients – especially as many trials will limit the prior therapies
they can have received, and some have lengthy lists of inclusion and exclusion
criteria that the patients must meet.

However, Thepaut says, non-immuno-oncology trials are having greater
recruitment problems. ‘There is so much excitement and hype around immuno-
oncology, it’s easier to persuade patients to join trials,’ she says. ‘So
although patient populations may be a bit thin, if anything we see reduced
issues for immuno-oncology.’

Early approval

Immuno-oncology products are often approved without undergoing full Phase III
development – sometimes on just Phase I/II or Phase II results, or even
single-arm trials. ‘We asked physicians, and they said that even if it is
approved after Phase I/II, it has still been approved and they would still use
it as a therapy,’ Thepaut says. ‘That may also be something that companies
bear in mind when designing their trials – recruit fewer patients but still
power the study correctly.’

Despite the increasingly crowded market, Thepaut still believes there is room
for new immuno-oncology products. ‘There will always be patients who have
massive unmet clinical need, who don’t respond to current options and have
limited alternatives,’ she says. ‘So far, physicians are still looking for
drugs that provide options for these patients. I think there will always be
space for pharmaceutical companies to keep developing.’

The potential of checkpoint inhibitors is getting wider recognition, too. At
his inaugural lecture of the Imperial Cancer Research UK centre at Imperial
College, London, in October, former US vice-president Joe Biden – who led
President Obama’s Cancer Moonshot and set up the Biden Cancer Initiative last
year – spoke about his son Beau’s treatment for brain cancer before he died in
2015, and how fast the field has advanced since then.

‘Before my son was diagnosed, immunotherapy was viewed as a “voodoo” science.
It wasn’t in the deal at all,’ Biden said. But the pace of change is rapid.
‘Oncologists are working routinely with immunologists and virologists and
chemical and biological engineers and others, in ways that didn’t even happen
just six years ago. And there’s no better example than what’s happening now in
immunotherapy around the world.’



