Cancer Immunotherapy Market is set to Grow US$ 145 Billion By 2024

Jan 17, 2019 (Heraldkeeper via COMTEX) -- New York, January 17, 2019: The
scope of the report includes a detailed study of global and regional markets
for Cancer Immunotherapy market with the reasons given for variations in the
growth of the industry in certain regions.

The report covers detailed competitive outlook including the market share and
company profiles of the key participants operating in the global market. Key
players profiled in the report include Amgen (U.S.), AstraZeneca (U.K.), F.
Hoffman La-Roche Ltd. (Switzerland), Bayer AG (Germany), Bristol-Myers Squibb
(U.S.), Eli Lilly and Company (U.S.), Janssen Global Services, LLC (Belgium),
Merck (U.S.), Novartis (Switzerland), and Pfizer (U.S.).. Company profile
includes assign such as company summary, financial summary,business strategy
and planning, SWOT analysis and current developments.

Immunotherapy is a treatment which uses particular parts of person's immune
organism to fight against cancer. Immune system is a collection of special
cells, organs and substance which protect us from diseases and infections.
Immune cells and the substances that make set out through your body to shield
it from germs that cause diseases. The immune system monitors the majority of
the substances typically found in the body. Any new substance that the immune
system doesnâ€™t perceive raises an alert, creating the resistant framework to
assault it. Cancer immunotherapy is a medicine that outfit and upgrade the
inborn forces of the immune system to battle tumor which represents the most
encouraging new disease treatment approach since the improvement of the
principal chemotherapies in the late 1940s.

The Cancer Immunotherapy Market has been segmented as below:

The Cancer Immunotherapy Market is Segmented on the lines of Type Segment
Analysis, Application Analysis, End-user Analysis and Regional Analysis. By
Type Segment Analysis this market is segmented on the basis of
Immunomodulators, Checkpoint inhibitors, Cancer vaccines and Monoclonal
antibodies. By Application Analysis this market is segmented on the basis of
Melanoma, Colorectal cancer, Prostate cancer, Head and neck cancer, Breast
cancer and Lung cancer.

By End-user Analysis this market is segmented on the basis of Hospitals
Sectors and Clinics and others Sectors. By Regional Analysis this market is
segmented on the basis of North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific and Rest of the
World.

The cancer immunotherapy market is expected to grow more than US$ 145 Billion
by 2022; Growing at a CAGR of more than 14% in the given forecast period.

This report provides:

1) An overview of the global market for cancer immunotherapy and related
technologies.  
2) Analyses of global market trends, with data from 2013, estimates for 2014
and 2015, and projections of compound annual growth rates (CAGRs) through
2022.  
3) Discovering of new market opportunities and targeted promotional plans for
cancer immunotherapy.  
4) Discussion of research and development, and the demand for new products and
new applications.  
5) Comprehensive company profiles of major players in the industry.

The major driving factors of cancer immunotherapy market are as follows:

Expansion of bioinformatics tools will enhance drug development procedure  
Growth in adoption of immunotherapy above other treatment alternatives  
Increase in incidence rate of cancer worldwide

The restraining factors of cancer immunotherapy market are as follows:

Treatment cost is high
